FAR in a Wild, unknown to publick View,
From Youth to Age a rev'rend Hermit grew;
The Moſs his Bed, the Cave his humble Cell,
His Food the Fruits, his Drink the chryſtal Well:
Remote from Man, with God he paſs'd the Days,
Pray'r all his Bus'neſs, all his Pleaſure Praiſe.
A Life ſo ſacred, ſuch ſerene Repoſe,
Seem'd Heav'n it ſelf, 'till one Suggeſtion roſe;
That Vice ſhou'd triumph, Virtue Vice obey,
This ſprung ſome Doubt of Providence's Sway:
His Hopes no more a certain Proſpect boaſt,
And all the Tenour of his Soul is loſt:
So when a ſmooth Expanſe receives impreſt
Calm Nature's Image on its wat'ry Breaſt,
Down bend the Banks, the Trees depending grow,
And Skies beneath with anſw'ring Colours glow:
But if a Stone the gentle Scene divide,
Swift ruffling Circles curl on ev'ry ſide,
And glimmering Fragments of a broken Sun,
Banks, Trees, and Skies, in thick Diſorder run.
To clear this Doubt, to know the World by Sight,
To find if Books, or Swains, report it right;
(For yet by Swains alone the World he knew,
Whoſe Feet came wand'ring o'er the nightly Dew)
He quits his Cell; the Pilgrim-Staff he bore,
And fix'd the Scallop in his Hat before;
Then with the Sun a riſing Journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each Event.
The Morn was waſted in the pathleſs Graſs,
And long and loneſome was the Wild to paſs;
But when the Southern Sun had warm'd the Day,
A Youth came poſting o'er a croſſing Way;
His Rayment decent, his Complexion fair,
And ſoft in graceful Ringlets wav'd his Hair.
Then near approaching, Father Hail! he cry'd,
And Hail, my Son, the rev'rend Sire reply'd;
Words followed Words, from Queſtion Anſwer flow'd
And Talk of various kind deceiv'd the Road;
'Till each with other pleas'd, and loth to part,
While in their Age they differ; joyn in Heart:
Thus ſtands an aged Elm in Ivy bound,
Thus youthful Ivy claſps an Elm around.
Now ſunk the Sun; the cloſing Hour of Day
Came onward, mantled o'er with ſober gray;
Nature in ſilence bid the World repoſe:
When near the Road a ſtately Palace roſe:
There by the Moon thro' Ranks of Trees they paſs,
Whoſe Verdure crown'd their ſloping ſides of Graſs.
It chanc't the noble Maſter of the Dome,
Still made his Houſe the wand'ring Stranger's home:
Yet ſtill the Kindneſs, from a Thirſt of Praiſe,
Prov'd the vain Flouriſh of expenſive Eaſe.
The Pair arrive: the Liv'ry'd Servants wait;
Their Lord receives them at the pompous Gate.
The Table groans with coſtly Piles of Food,
And all is more than Hoſpitably good.
Then led to reſt, the Day's long Toil they drown,
Deep ſunk in Sleep, and Silk, and Heaps of Down.
At length 'tis Morn, and at the Dawn of Day,
Along the wide Canals the Zephyrs play;
Freſh o'er the gay Parterres the Breezes creep,
And ſhake the neighb'ring Wood to baniſh Sleep.
Up riſe the Gueſts, obedient to the Call,
'An early Banquet deck'd the ſplendid Hall;
Rich luſcious Wine a golden Goblet grac't,
Which the kind Maſter forc'd the Gueſts to taſte.
Then pleas'd and thankful, from the Porch they go,
And, but the Landlord, none had cauſe of Woe;
His Cup was vaniſh'd; for in ſecret Guiſe
The younger Gueſt purloin'd the glittering Prize.
As one who 'ſpys a Serpent in his Way,
Gliſtning and basking in the Summer Ray,
Diſorder'd ſtops to ſhun the Danger near,
Then walks with Faintneſs on, and looks with Fear:
So ſeem'd the Sire; when far upon the Road,
The ſhining Spoil his wiley Partner ſhow'd.
He ſtopp'd with Silence, walk'd with trembling Heart,
And much he wiſh'd, but durſt not ask to part:
Murm'ring he lifts his Eyes, and thinks it hard,
That generous Actions meet a baſe Reward.
While thus they paſs, the Sun his Glory ſhrouds,
The changing Skies hang out their ſable Clouds;
A Sound in Air preſag'd approaching Rain,
And Beaſts to covert ſcud a croſs the Plain.
Warn'd by the Signs, the wand'ring Pair retreat,
To ſeek for Shelter at a neighb'ring Seat.
'Twas built with Turrets, on a riſing Ground,
And ſtrong, and large, and unimprov'd around;
Its Owner's Temper, tim'rous and ſevere,
Unkind and griping, caus'd a Deſert there.
As near the Miſer's heavy Doors they drew,
Fierce riſing Guſts with ſudden Fury blew;
The nimble Light'ning mix'd with Show'rs began,
And o'er their Heads loud-rolling Thunder ran.
Here long they knock, but knock or call in vain,
Driv'n by the Wind, and battered by the Rain.
At length ſome Pity warm'd the Maſter's Breaſt,
('Twas then, his Threſhold firſt receiv'd a Gueſt)
Slow creaking turns the Door with jealous Care,
And half he welcomes in the ſhivering Pair;
One frugal Faggot lights the naked Walls,
And Nature's Fervor thro' their Limbs recals:
Bread of the courſeſt ſort, with eager Wine,
(Each hardly granted) ſerv'd them both to dine;
And when the Tempeſt firſt appear'd to ceaſe,
A ready Warning bid them part in Peace.
With ſtill Remark the pond'ring Hermit view'd
In one ſo rich, a Life ſo poor and rude;
And why ſhou'd ſuch, (within himſelf he cry'd,)
Lock the loſt Wealth a thouſand want beſide?
But what new Marks of Wonder ſoon took place,
In ev'ry ſettling Feature of his Face!
When from his Veſt the young Companion bore
That Cup, the gen'rous Landlord own'd before,
And paid profuſely with the precious Bowl
The ſtinted Kindneſs of this churliſh Soul.
But now the Clouds in airy Tumult fly,
The Sun emerging opes an azure Sky;
A freſher green the ſmelling Leaves diſplay,
And glitt'ring as they tremble, cheer the Day:
The Weather courts them from the poor Retreat,
And the glad Maſter bolts the wary Gate.
While hence they walk, the Pilgrim's Boſom wrought,
With all the Travel of uncertain Thought;
His Partner's Acts without their Cauſe appear,
'Twas there a Vice, and ſeem'd a Madneſs here:
Deteſting that, and pitying this he goes,
Loſt and confounded with the various Shows.
Now Night's dim Shades again involve the Sky;
Again the Wand'rers want a Place to lye,
Again they ſearch, and find a Lodging nigh.
The Soil improv'd around, the Manſion neat,
And neither poorly low, nor idly great:
It ſeem'd to ſpeak its Maſter's turn of Mind,
Content, and not for Praiſe, but Virtue kind.
Hither the Walkers turn with weary Feet
Then bleſs the Manſion, and the Maſter greet:
Their greeting fair beſtow'd, with modeſt Guiſe,
The courteous Maſter hears, and thus replies:
Without a vain, without a grudging Heart,
To Him who gives us all, I yield a part;
From Him you come, for Him accept it here,
A frank and ſober, more than coſtly Cheer.
He ſpoke, and bid the welcome Table ſpread,
Then talk'd of Virtue till the time of Bed,
When the grave Houſhold round his Hall repair,
Warn'd by a Bell, and cloſe the Hours with Pray'r.
At length the World renew'd by calm Repoſe
Was ſtrong for Toil, the dappled Morn aroſe;
Before the Pilgrims part, the Younger crept,
Near the clos'd Cradle where an Infant ſlept,
And writh'd his Neck: the Landlord's little Pride,
Oſtrange Return! grew black, and gaſp'd, and dy'd.
Horrour of Horrours! what! his only Son!
How look'd our Hermit when the Fact was done?
Not Hell, tho' Hell's black Jaws in ſunder part,
And breathe blue Fire, cou'd more aſſault his Heart.
Confus'd, and ſtruck with Silence at the Deed,
He flies, but trembling fails to fly with Speed.
His Steps the Youth purſues; the Country lay
Perplex'd with Roads, a Servant ſhow'd the Way:
A River croſs'd the Path; the Paſſage o'er
Was nice to find; the Servant trod before;
Long arms of Oaks an open Bridge ſupply'd,
And deep the Waves beneath the bending glide.
The Youth, who ſeem'd to watch a Time to ſin,
Approach'd the careleſs Guide, and thruſt him in;
Plunging he falls, and riſing lifts his Head,
Then flaſhing turns, and ſinks among the Dead.
Wild, ſparkling Rage inflames the Father's Eyes,
He burſts the Bands of Fear, and madly cries,
Deteſted Wretch— But ſcarce his Speech began,
When the ſtrange Partner ſeem'd no longer Man:
His youthful Face grew more ſerenely ſweet;
His Robe turn'd white, and flow'd upon his Feet;
Fair rounds of radiant Points inveſt his Hair;
Celeſtial Odours breathe thro' purpled Air;
And Wings, whoſe Colours glitter'd on the Day,
Wide at his Back their gradual Plumes diſplay.
The Form Etherial burſts upon his Sight,
And moves in all the Majeſty of Light.
Tho' loud at firſt the Pilgrim's Paſſion grew,
Sudden he gaz'd, and wiſt not what to do;
Surprize in ſecret Chains his words ſuſpends,
And in a Calm his ſettling Temper ends.
But Silence here the beauteous Angel broke,
(The Voice of Muſick raviſh'd as he ſpoke)
Thy Pray'r, thy Praiſe, thy Life to Vice unknown,
In ſweet Memorial riſe before the Throne:
Theſe Charms, Succeſs in our bright Region find,
And force an Angel down, to calm thy Mind;
For this commiſſion'd, I forſook the Sky,
Nay, ceaſe to kneel— Thy fellow Servant I.
Then know the Truth of Government Divine,
And let theſe Scruples be no longer thine.
The Maker juſtly claims that World he made,
In this the Right of Providence is laid;
Its ſacred Majeſty thro' all depends
On uſing ſecond Means to work his Ends:
'Tis thus, withdrawn in State from human Eye,
The Pow'r exerts his Attributes on high,
Your Actions uſes, not controuls your Will,
And bids the doubting Sons of Men be ſtill.
What ſtrange Events can ſtrike with more Surprize,
Than thoſe which latelyſtrook thy wond'ring Eyes?
Yet taught by theſe, confeſs th' Almighty Juſt,
And where you can't unriddle, learn to truſt!
The Great, Vain Man, who far'd on coſtly Food,
Whoſe Life was too luxurious to be good;
Who made his Iv'ry Stands with Goblets ſhine,
And forc'd his Gueſts to morning Draughts of Wine,
Has, with the Cup, the graceleſs Cuſtom loſt,
And ſtill he welcomes, but with leſs of Coſt.
The mean, ſuſpicious Wretch, whoſe bolted Door,
Ne'er mov'd in Duty to the wand'ring Poor;
With him I left the Cup, to teach his Mind
That Heav'n can bleſs, if Mortals will be kind.
Conſcious of wanting Worth, he views the Bowl,
And feels Compaſſion touch his grateful Soul.
Thus Artiſts melt the ſullen Oar of Lead,
With heaping Coals of Fire upon its Head;
In the kind Warmth the Metal learns to glow,
And looſe from Droſs, the Silver runs below.
Long had our pious Friend in Virtue trod,
But now the Child half-wean'd his Heart from God;
(Child of his Age) for him he liv'd in Pain,
And meaſur'd back his Steps to Earth again.
To what Exceſſes had his Dotage run?
But God, to ſave the Father, took the Son.
To all but thee, in Fits he ſeem'd to go,
(And 'twas my Miniſtry to deal the Blow)
The poor fond Parent humbled in the Duſt,
Now owns in Tears the Puniſhment was juſt.
But how had all his Fortune felt a Wrack,
Had that falſe Servant ſped in Safety back?
This Night his treaſur'd Heaps he meant to ſteal,
And what a Fund of Charity wou'd fail!
Thus Heav'n inſtructs thy Mind: This Tryal o'er,
Depart in Peace, reſign, and ſin no more.
On ſounding Pinnions here the Youth withdrew,
The Sage ſtood wond'ring as the Seraph flew.
Thus look'd Eliſha, when to mount on high,
His Maſter took the Chariot of the Sky;
The fiery Pomp aſcending left the View;
The Prophet gaz'd, and wiſh'd to follow too.
The bending Hermit here a Pray'r begun,
Lord! as in Heaven, on Earth thy Will be done.
Then gladly turning, ſought his antient place,
And paſs'd a Life of Piety and Peace.