[1] I had named, in some former editions, a particular church, viz. KILKHAMPTON; where several of the monuments, described in the following pages, really exist. But as I thought it convenient, to mention some cases here, which are not, according to the best of my remembrance, referred to in any inscriptions there; I have now omitted the name. That imagination might operate more freely, and the improvement of the reader be consulted, without any thing that should look like a variation from truth and fact.

[2] The Name of a grand seat, belonging to the late Earl of Bath; remarkable formerly for its excellent workmanship, and elegant furniture; once the principal resort of the quality and gentry of the West; but now demolished, laid even with the ground, and scarce one stone left upon another.—So that corn may grow, or nettles spring, where Stow lately stood.

[3] 1 Kings, viii.27. But will—A fine abrupt beginning, most significantly describing the amazement and rapture of the royal prophet's mind!—GOD: He uses no epithet, where writers of inferiour discernment would have been found to multiply them: But speaks of the Deity, as an incomprehensible Being, whose perfections and glories are exalted above all praise.—Dwell: To bestow on sinful creatures a propitious look; to favour them with a transient visit of kindness; even this were an unutterable obligation. Will he then vouchsafe to fix his abode among them, and take up his stated residence with them?—Indeed: A word, in this connexion, peculiarly emphatical; expressive of a condescension, wonderful and extraordinary almost beyond all credibility. Behold: intimating the continued, or rather the increasing surprise of the speaker, and awakening the attention of the hearer. Behold! the Heaven: The spacious concave of the firmament; that wide extended azure circumference, in which worlds unnumbered perform their revolutions, is too scanty an apartment for the Godhead.—Nay, The Heaven of Heavens: Those vastly higher tracts, which be far beyond the limits of human survey; to which our very thoughts can hardly soar: even these (unbounded as they are) cannot afford an adequate habitation for JEHOVAH; even these dwindle into a point, when compared with the infinitude of his essence; even these are as nothing before him. —How much less proportionate is this poor diminutive speek (which I have been erecting and embellishing), to so august a Presence, so immense a Majesty!

[4] Psal. cxiii.6.

[5] Heb. ix.7.

[6] —[non-Latin text omitted in source transcription], was the favourite maxim of Pythagoras, and supposed to be one of the best moral precepts, ever given to the Heathen world. With what superiour force, and very singular advantage, does the argument take place in the christian scheme! where we are taught to regard ourselves, not merely as intellectual beings, who have Reason for our monitor; but as consecrated creatures, who have a GOD of the most consummate perfection, ever with us, ever in us.

[7] 2 Cor. vi.16.

[8] Ezek. ii.10.

[9] Gen. xxviii.17.

[10] Deut. xxxii.29.

[11] The man how wise, who, sick of gaudy scenes,
Is led by choice to take his fav'rite walk
Beneath Death's gloomy, silent, cypress shades,
Unpierc'd by Vanity's fantastick ray!
To read his monuments, to weigh his dust,
Visit his vaults, and dwell among the tombs!
Night Thoughts,

[12] Wait the great teacher Death[unclear punctuation] POPE.

[13] Mista senum ac juvenum densantur funera. HOR.

[14] Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina tanta,
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent.
VIRG.

[15] Job iii.13.

[16] Matt. xxvii.34.

[17] Happy the babe, who, privileg'd by fate
To shorter labour, and a lighter weight,
Receiv'd but yesterday the gift of breath,
Order'd tomorrow to return to death.
PRIOR'S SOL.

[18] Isa. lvii.1.

[19] Job iv.19, [non-Latin text omitted in source transcription]—Ad instar, ad modum, Tineae.—I retain this interpretation, both as it is most suitable to my purpose, and as it is patronized by some eminent commentators; especially the celebrated Schultens. Though I cannot but give the preference to the opinion of a judicious friend, who would render the passage more literally, before the face of a moth: Making it to represent a creature so exceedingly frail, that even a moth, flying against it, may dash it to pieces.—Which, besides its closer correspondence with the exact import of the Hebrew, presents us with a much finer image of the most extreme imbecility. For it certainly implies a far greater degree of weakness, to be crushed by the feeble flutter of the feeblest creature, than only to be crushed as easily as that creature, by the hand of man.— The French version is very expressive and beautiful; à la Rencontre d'un Vermisseau.

[20] A distress of this kind is painted in very affecting colours by Pliny, in an epistle to Marcellinus; O triste plane acerbumque Funus! O Morte ipsa Mortis Tempus indignius! jam destinata erat egregio Juveni; jam electus Nuptiarum Dies; jam nos advocati. Quod Gaudium quo Moerore mutatum est! Non possum exprimere Verbis, quantum Animo vulnus acceperim, quum audivi Fundanum ipsum (ut multa luctuosa Dolor invenit) praecipientem, quod in Vestes, Margaritas Gemmas, fuerat erogaturus, hoc in Thura, & Unguenta, & Ordores impenderetur. PLIN. Lib. V. Epist. 26.

[21] Night Thoughts.

[22] 1 Kings xxii.34.

[23] Isa. xxxvii.3.

[24] These verses are inscribed on a small, but elegant monument, lately erected in the great church at Northampton. Which, in the Hieroglyphical decorations, corresponds with the description introduced above. In this circumstance particularly, that it is dedicated to the memory of an amiable woman, Mrs. ANNE STONHOUSE; the excellent wife of my worthy friend Dr. STONHOUSE. Who has seen all the powers of that healing art, to which I, and so many others have been greatly indebted, failing in their attempts to preserve a life dearer to him than his own.
Nec prosunt Domino, quae prosunt omnibus, Artes.


No longer his all healing art avails;
But ev'ry remedy its master fails.

In the midst of this tender distress, he has sought some kind of consolation, even from the sepulchral marble. By teaching it to speak, at once, his esteem for her memory; and his veneration for that religion, which she so eminently adorned. Nor could this be more significantly done, than by summing up her character, in that concise, but comprehensive sentence, A SINCERE CHRISTIAN. Concise enough, to be the motto for a mourning ring; yet as comprehensive, as the most enlarged sphere of personal, social, and religious worth. For, whatsoever things are pure; whatsoever things are lovely; whatsoever things are of good report; are they not all included in that grand and noble aggregate, a sincere Christian? The first lines, considered in such a connexion, are wonderfully plaintive and pathetick— How lov'd, how valu'd once, avails thee not;
To whom related, or by whom begot.
They sound, at least in my ears, like the voice of sorrow, mingled with admiration. The speaker seems to have been lost, for a while, in melancholy contemplation; suddenly breaks out into this abrupt encomium; then melts into tears, and can proceed no farther. Yet, in this case, how eloquent is silence! While it hints the universal esteem which attended, and the superiority of birth which distinguished, the deceased wife; it expresses, beyond all the pomp of words, the yearning affection, and heartfelt affliction of the surviving husband.—Amidst the group of monumental marbles, which are lavish of their panegyrick; this, I think, resembles the incomparable address of the painter—who, having placed, round a beautiful expiring virgin, her friends in all the agonies of grief; represented the unequalled anguish of the father, with far greater liveliness[unclear punctuation] and strength, or rather with an inexpressible emphasis, by drawing a veil over his face. If the last lines, are a wide departure from the beaten track of our modern epitaphs, and the very reverse of their highflown compliments— A heap of dust alone remains of thee!
'Tis all THOU art!—and all the PROUD shall be!
they are not without a precedent, and one of the most consummate kind. Since they breathe the very spirit of that sacred elegy, in which all the heart of the hero and the friend, seems to be dissolved; How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished! 2 Sam. i.27.—They remind the reader, of that awful lesson, which was originally dictated by the supreme wisdom—dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return, Gen. iii.19.—They inculcate, with all the force of the mo[illegible] convincing evidence, that solemn admonition, delivered by the prophet—Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is HE to be accounted of? Isa. ii.22. That no reader, however inattentive, might mistake the sense and design of this part of the fourth line— 'Tis ALL thou art!— it is guarded above and beneath.—Above, is an expanded book, that seems to be waved, with an air of triumph, over the emblem of death. Which we cannot but suppose to be the volume of inspiration, as it exhibits a sort of abridgement of its whole contents, in those animated words; BE YE NOT SLOTHFUL, BUT FOLLOWERS OF THEM, WHO THROUGH FAITH AND PATIENCE INHERIT THE PROMISES, Heb. vi.12.—Beneath, that every part might be pregnant with instruction, are those striking reflections; worthy the consideration of the highest proficient in knowledge and piety, yet obvious to the understanding of the most untaught reader; LIFE, HOW SHORT; ETERNITY, HOW LONG!—May my soul learn the forcible purport of this short lesson, in her contracted span of time! and all eternity will not be too long, to rejoice in having learned it.

[25] 2 Tim. iv.8.

[26] Nascia Mens Hominum fati, Sortisqu[illegible] futurae!
Turno Tempus [illegible]rit, magno cum optaverit emptum,
Intactum Pallanta; & cum Spolia ista Diemque
Oderit.—
VIRG.

[27] Gen. xxx.1.

[28] Texts of scripture, proper for such an occasion; containing promises—of support under affliction, Lam. iii.32. Heb. xii.6. 2 Cor. iv.17.—of pardon, Isai. liii 5. Isai. i.18. 1 John ii.1, 2. Acts x.43.—of justification, Rom. v.9. Rom. viii.33, 34. 2 Cor. v.21.—of victory over death, Psalm xxiii.4. Psalm lxxiii.26. 1 Cor. xv.56, 57.—of a happy resurrection, John vi.40. 2 Cor. v.1. Rev. vii.16, 17.

[29] Heb, xiii.5.

[30] Jerem. xlix.11.

[31] —Plurima mortis imago.
VIRG.

[32] —Hac mente laborem
Sese ferre, senes ut in otia tuta recedant,
A[illegible]unt, cum sibi sint congesta cibaria.—
HOR.

[33] Psalm xxxix.6.

[34] Lean not on earth; 'twill pierce thee to the heart.
A broken reed at best, but oft a spear:
On its sharp point peace bleeds, and hope expires.
Night Thoughts, No. III.

[35] Eccles. xii.3, 5. I need not remind my reader, that, by the former of these figurative expressions, is signified the enervated state of the hands and arms; by the latter the dimness of the eyes, or the total loss of sight; that, taken in connexion with other parts of the chapter, they exhibit, in a series of bold and lively metaphors, a description of the various infirmities attendant on old age.

[36] Matt. xxv.9.

[37] 1 Cor. iii.15.

[38] May I be permitted to recommend, as a treasure of inestimable value, and a treatise particularly apposite to my subject. DR. LUCAS's INQUIRY AFTER HAPPINESS? That part especially, which displays the method, and enumerates the advantages of improving life, or living much in a little time. Chap. III. p. 158. of the 6th Edit.—An author, in whom the gentleman, the scholar, and the christian, are most happily united. A performance; which, in point of solid argument, unaffected piety, and a vein of thought amazingly fertile, has, perhaps, no superiour.—Nor can I wish my reader a more refined pleasure, or a more substantial happiness; than that of having the sentiments of this entertaining and pathetick writer, wove into the very texture of his heart.

[39] Job v.26.

[40] Some, I know, are offended at our burying corpses within the church; and exclaim against it, as a very great impropriety and indecency. But this, I imagine, proceeds from an excessive and mistaken delicacy. If proper care be taken to secure from injury, the foundations of the building; and to prevent the exhalation of any noxious effluvia, from the putrefying flesh; I cannot discover any inconveniences, attending this practice. The notion, that noisome carcasses (as they are called) are very unbecoming a place consecrated to religious purposes, seems to be derived from the antiquated Jewish canon. Whereby it was declared, that a dead body imparted defilement to the person who touched it; and polluted the spot, where it was lodged. On which account, the Jews were scrupulously careful, to have their sepulchres built at a distance from their houses; and made it a point of conscience, not to suffer burial places to subsist in the city. But as this was a rite purely ceremonial; it seems to be entirely superseded by the gospel dispensation. I cannot forbear thinking, that, under the christian economy, there is a propriety and usefulness in the custom.—Usefulness, because it must render our solemn assemblies more venerable and awful. For when we walk over the dust of our friends, or kneel upon the ashes of our relations; this awakening circumstance must strike a lively impression of our own mortality. And what consideration can be more effectual, to make us serious and attentive in hearing; earnest and importunate in praying? As for the fitness of the usage, it seems perfectly suitable to the design of those sacred edifices. They are set apart for GOD; not only to receive his worshippers, but to preserve the furniture for holy ministrations, and what is, in a peculiar manner, appropriated to the divine majesty. Are not the bodies of the saints the Almighty's property? Were they not once the objects of his tender love? Are they not still the subjects of his special care? Has he not given commandment concerning the bones of his elect; and charged the ocean, and enjoined the grave, to keep them until that day? When rocks bright with gems, or mountains rich with mines, are ab[illegible]ndoned to the devouring flames; will not these be rescued from the fiery ruin? Will not these be translated into JEHOVAH's kingdom, and, conjointly with the soul, made "his jewels;" made "his peculiar treasure;" made to shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever? Is not CHRIST the LORD of our bodies? Are they not bought with a price? bought, not with corruptible things, silver and gold, but with his divinely precious blood. And, if the blessed JESUS obtained the redemption of our bodies, at so infinitely dear a rate; can it enter into our hearts to conceive, that he should dislike to have them reposed, under his own habitation?—Once more; are not the bodies of the faithful temples of the Holy Ghost? And is there not upon this supposition, an apparent propriety, rather than the least indecorum, in remitting these temples of flesh to the temples made with hands? They are vessels of honour; instruments of righteousness; and, even when broken by death, like the fragments of a golden bowl, are valuable; are worthy to be laid up in the safest, most honourable repositories. Upon the whole, since the LORD JESUS has purchased them, at the expense of his blood; and the blessed spirit has honoured them, with his indwelling presence: since they are right dear in the sight of the adorable Trinity, and undoubted heirs of a glorious immortality, why should it be thought a thing improper, to admit them to a transient rest, in their heavenly father's house? Why may they not lie down and sleep in the outer courts, since they are soon to be introduced, into the inmost mansions of everlasting honour and joy?

[41] Isai. lx.1.

[42] Deut. xxxiii.1.27.

[43] Seneca's reflections upon the state of holy souls, delivered from the burden of the flesh, are sparkling and fine; yet very indistinct and empty, compared with the particulars mentioned above, and with many others that might be collected from scripture. In hoc tam procelloso, & in omnes Tempestates exposito navigantibus Mari, nullus portus, nisi Mortis est. Ne itaque invideris Fratrituo; quiescit. Tandem liber, tandem tutus, tandem aeternus est. Fruitur nunc aperto & libero Coelo; ex bumili & depresso, in eum emicuet Locum, qui solutas Vinculis Anim is beat[illegible] recipit Sinu; & nunc omnia Rerum Natura Bona cum summa Voluptate percipit. SEN. ad Polyb.

[44] Wisdom v.4, 5.

[45] 1 John v.20.

[46] 2 Sam. iii.33. Of this indignity our LORD complains; Are you come out as against a thief? Matt. xxvi.55.

[47] Sir Bevil Granville, slain in the civil wars, at an engagement with the rebels—It may possibly be some entertainment to the reader, If I subjoin Sir Bevil's character; as it is drawn by that celebrated pen, which wrote the history of those calamitous times.— That which would have clouded any victory, says the noble historian, and made the loss of others less spoken of, was the death of Sir Bevil Granville. He was indeed an excellent person, whose activity, interest, and reputation, were the foundation of what had been done in Cornwall: His temper and affections so publick, that no accident which happened, could make any impression upon him: And his example kept others from taking any thing ill, or at least seeming to do so. In a word, a brighter courage, and a gentler disposition, were never married together, to make the most cheerful and innocent conversation. CLAR. Hist. Reb. Vol.

[48] —Data sunt ipsis quoque Fata Sepulchris.
JUV.

[49] Rev. iii.5.

[50] —Mors sola fatetur
Quantula sint Hominum Corpuscula.—
JUV.

[51] Deut. xxviii.56.

[52] Job xxiv.20.

[53] Quo fugit Venus? Heu! Quove Color? decens
Quo Motus? Quid habet illius, illius,
Quae spiribat Amores,
Quae me supuerat mihi?
HOR.

[54] Rev. vi.8.

[55] 2 Esdr. vii.41.

[56] I pass with melancholy state,
By all these solemn heaps of fate;
And think, as soft and sad I tread
Above the venerable dead,
"Time was, like me, they life possess'd;
"And time will be, when I shall rest."
PA[illegible]NEL.

[57] 1 Sam. xxviii.19. On this place, the Dutch translator of the meditations has added a note, to correct, very probably, what he supposes a mistake. On the same supposition, I presume, the compilers of our rubrick ordered the last verse of Eclus xlvi. to be omitted, in the daily service of the church. But that the sentiment, hinted above is strictly true; that it was [non-Latin text omitted in source transcription] Samuel himself (not an inferna[illegible] spirit, personating the prophet) who appeared to the female necromancer at Endor; appeared, not in compliance with any diabolical incantations, but in pursuance of the divine commission; this, I think, is fully proved in the historical account of the life of David, Vol. I. Chap. 23.

[58] The Scriptures, speaking of the supreme Being, say—He walketh upon the waves of the sea; to denote his uncontroulable power, Job ix.8.—He walketh in the circuit of heaven; to express the immensity of his presence, Job xxii.14.—He walketh upon the wings of the wind; to signify the amazing swiftness of his operation, Psal. civ.3. —In which last phrase there is, I think, an elegance and emphasis, not taken notice of by our commentators, yet unequalled in any writer.—Not, He flieth; He runneth, but, He walketh; and that, on the very wings of the wind; on the most impetuous of elements roused into its utmost rage, and sweeping along with inconceivable rapidity.—A tumult in nature, not to be described, is the composed and sedate work of the DEITY. A speed, not to be measured, is (with reverence I use the expression, and to comport with our low methods of conception) the solemn and majestick foot pace of JEHOVAH.—How flat are the following lines, even in the great master of lyrick song, Ocyor Cervis, & agente Nimbos
Ocyor Euro,
when compared with this inimitable stroke of divine poetry!—He walketh upon the wings of the wind.

[59] John xi.26.

[60] Death's terrour is the mountain faith removes:
'Tis faith disarms destruction.—
Believe, and look with triumph on the tomb.
These, and some other quotations, I am proud to borrow from the Night Thoughts, especially from Night the Fourth. In which, energy of language, sublimity of sentiment, and the most exquisite beauties of poetry, are the least perfections to be admired. Almost every line glows with devotion; rises into the most exalted apprehensions of the adorable Redeemer; and is animated with the most lively faith in his all sufficient mediation. The author of this excellent performance has the peculiar felicity, of ennobling all the strength of style, and every delicacy of imagination, with the grand and momentous truths of christianity. These thoughts give the highest entertainment to the fancy; and impart the noblest improvement to the mind. They not only refine our taste, but prepare us for death, and ripen us for glory. I never take up this admirable piece, but I am ready to cry out—Tecum vivere amem, [illegible]ecum obeam libens; i. e[unclear punctuation] Inspire me with such a spirit, and life shall be delightful, nor death itself unwelcome.

[61] Luke x.19.

[62] Phil. i.23. 2 Tim. iv.7, 8.

[63] 2 Pet. i.14.

[64] Isai. xi.8.

[65] Acts xxviii.55.

[66] Zech. ix.12.

[67] Isaiah, speaking of the new Jerusalem, mentions this, as one of its immunities: The inhabitant thereof shall no more say, I am sick. Another clause, in its royal charter runs thus; GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain. Isai. xxxiii.24. Rev. xxi.4.

[68] Job xi.8, 9.

[69] —Animus meminisse borret, luctuque refugit.
VIRG.

[70] See a valuable Poem, entitled The Grave.

[71] Isa. xxvii.11.

[72] Job xx.27.

[73] Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell; hope never comes
That comes to all: But torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
With ever burning sulphur unconsum'd.
MILT.

[74] Great day of dread, decision, and despair!
At thought of thee, each sublunary wish
Lets go its eager grasp, and quits the world.
Night Thoughts.

[75] Isai. xxiv.20.
