A halcyon Calm has lull'd the wat'ry Plain,
Th' unmoving Canvas flags beside the Mast,
The gliding Bark scarce cleaves th' unruffled Main,
Tho' fond Impatience bids each Zephyr haste. —

Such Stillness yields the gen'ral Hour of Rest;
Such peaceful Waftage to the Saint is giv'n,
When, from Life's Tumults hast'ning to be blest,
He meets the Smile of unoffended Heav'n!

Now light upsprings the Breeze, the Sails unfold,
The ready Crew the fav'ring Gale improve,
The sun-bright Current flames with waving Gold,
And each broad Shore and Forest seems to move.

I hail at last these Shades, this well-known Wood,
That skirts with verdant Slope the barren Strand,
Where NETLEY'S Ruins bord'ring on the Flood
Forlorn in melancholy Greatness stand.

How chang'd, alas! from that rever'd Abode
Grac'd by proud Majesty in ancient Days,
When Monks recluse these sacred Pavements trod,
And taught th' unletter'd World its MAKER'S Praise!

Now sunk, deserted, and with Weeds o'ergrown,
Yon prostrate Walls their harder Fate bewail;
Low on the Ground their topmost Spires are thrown,
Once friendly Marks to guide the wand'ring Sail.

The Ivy now with rude Luxuriance bends
Its tangled Foliage through the cloister'd Space,
O'er the green Window's mould'ring Height ascends,
And fondly clasps it with a last Embrace. —

Where burn the gorgeous Altars lasting Fires?
Where frowns the dreadful Sanctuary now?
No more Religion's awful Flame aspires!
No more th' Asylum guards the fated Brow!

No more shall Charity, with sparkling Eyes
And Smiles of Welcome, wide unfold the Door,
Where Pity list'ning still to Nature's Cries
Befriends the Wretched, and relieves the Poor!

No more these hoary Wilds, these dark'ning Groves,
To vocal Bands return the Note of Praise,
Whose Chiefs (as slow their long Procession moves)
On the rear'd Cross with Adoration gaze! —

And while to neighb'ring Waves, th' unwonted Show,
Each parting Bough, and op'ning Glade reveals,
The awe-struck Sailor checks the hast'ning Prow,
Suspends his Oar, and wonders what he feels. —

Thus musing, oft I pace the moss-grown Isle,
Each low-brow'd Vault, each dark Recess explore,
While the bleak Wind howls through the shatter'd Pile,
Or Wave hoarse-murm'ring breaks along the Shore.

No other Sounds, amid these Arches heard,
The death-like Silence of their Gloom molest,
Save, the shrill Plaints of some unsocial Bird,
That seeks the House of Solitude to rest.

Save, when their tinkling Leaders to the Shade
Of these cool Grots invite the fleecy Folds,
Where oft the sated Ox supinely laid
With lowing Herds a distant Converse holds!

Or where the Gothic Pillar's slender Form
(Unequal to th' incumbent Quarry's Weight)
Deserts its Post, and reeling to the Storm,
With sullen Crash resigns its Charge to Fate.

While the self-planted Oak within confin'd
(Auxiliar to the Tempest's wild Uproar)
Its giant Branches fluctuates to the Wind,
And rends the Wall whose Aid it courts no more.

Here too (Belief could old Tradition claim)
Where swells the rocky Mound in shapeless Heaps,
(His Name forgot, his Guilt divulg'd by Fame)
Some rude Dismantler of this Abbey sleeps.

Long, long in Thought the patient Earth he curs'd,
That bore the Fabric's then unbroken Spires;
Long wish'd the Pow'r to bid Volcano's burst,
Or call from Heav'n thought-executing Fires.

"Wide wave (he cry'd) all bright with golden Grain
"The neighb'ring Vales, while this proud cumb'rous Mass
"For many a barren Furlong chills the Plain,
"And draws with idle Zeal the Crowds that pass:

"No more the Vot'ries of each time-shook Pile,
"As Ruin's Heirs, shall call these Shades their own,
"For blazon'd Arms explore the pageant Isle,
"Or search dark Registers of faithless Stone."

He spoke—resolv'd.—The menac'd Arches frown'd,
The conscious Walls in sudden Conflict join'd,
Crush'd the pale Wretch in one promiscuous Wound,
And left this Monument of Wrath behind. —

Scenes such as these, with salutary Change,
O'er flatt'ring Life their Melancholy cast,
Teach the free Thoughts on Wings of Air to range,
O'erlook the present, and recall the past! —

Here pious Beadsmen, from the World retir'd,
In blissful Visions wing'd their Souls to Heav'n;
While future Joys their sober Transports fir'd,
They wept their erring Days, and were forgiv'n.

Their blameless Race succeeding, in these Cells
Ere Death impos'd the Lesson, learn'd to die;
Alike forgot, no rais'd Memorial tells
In which lone Spot their kindred Ashes lie!

Mute is the Matin Bell, whose early Call
Warn'd the grey Fathers from their humble Beds;
No midnight Taper gleams along the Wall,
Or round the sculptur'd Saint its Radiance sheds!

No Martyr's Shrine its high-wrought Gold displays
To bid the wond'ring Zealot hither roam;
No Relick here the Pilgrim's Toil o'erpays,
And cheers his Footsteps to a distant Home! —

Still Twilight now its Shade advancing throws,
Faint in the West the Day's last Blush is seen;
On Night's dim Front the Star of Ev'ning glows,
And gilds with distant Beams the solemn Scene.

Illusion now re-peoples all the Void,
From Death recalls the venerable Train
(Whose Thoughts no more Earth's trivial Cares employ'd)
To tread their ancient Bounds, and weep again.

Swift as her Wish th' embody'd Shades appear,
O'er Paths much chang'd with doubtful Step they walk,
Each Eye rolls fast the visionary Tear,
And list'ning Fancy thinks she hears them talk.

"Say, rev'rend Forms, in Contemplation's Hour,
"While Life serene its golden Current roll'd,
"Did no kind Warning, no prophetic Pow'r
"This ravag'd Mansion's future Woes unfold?

"Did ye ne'er think the Page of Joy would close?
"Ne'er dread a royal Plunderer's mighty Hand?
"Your exil'd Order's yet unnumber'd Woes,
"Their Name extinguish'd, and their Rites prophan'd?"

Silent, they pass, then fading like a Dream,
To seek their lone unhonor'd Graves return,
Yet fleeting they bequeath a Sigh, and seem
With me these violated Groves to mourn. —

Yon parted Roofs that nod aloft in Air,
The threat'ning Battlement, the rifted Tow'r,
The Choir's loose Fragments scatter'd round, declare,
Insulting TIME, the Triumphs of thy Pow'r!

Shall Man, unwarn'd, survey with prescient smile
Of long Futurity the plann'd Abode? —
Vain Augur, turn!—behold where sinks the Pile,
A Monarch rais'd in Honour of his God!

Low lies that sceptred Founder's holy Head,
Whose Virtues bade these friendly Walls ascend;
Applauding Angels grac'd his dying Bed,
And Hope's bright Dawn rose cloudless on his End!

Lamented Prince!—for Mercy's Task he knew,
The Reins of lengthen'd Empire gently sway'd;
He rais'd the suppliant Tribe his Sire o'erthrew,
And round his Bier each grateful Convent pray'd.

Not so retir'd fell JOHN'S indignant Soul—
For him no Vows the Doom of Heav'n oppos'd;
Insulted Priesthood mix'd th' envenom'd Bowl,
And Death his Eyes in howling Anguish clos'd.

Unsteady Ruler of a Nation's Helm,
Long struggling Freedom own'd thy hard Command;
Till fierce in Arms thy BARONS shook the Realm,
And tore THE CHARTER from thy wav'ring Hand!

Peace guard their Dust!—their Merits Glory crown!—
Too far their Worth transports the roving Muse,
Who kindles at the Tale of old Renown,
Nor dares the Strain to Liberty refuse. —

And now—farewel, ye Walls, ye Roofs sublime,
Ye length'ning Choirs, a venerable Gloom!
And when, like you, your Poet bows to Time,
In yon dim Cloister yield his Ashes Room!

His Hopes ne'er rose to emulate the Dead,
Whose dear-bought Trophies crowd the venal Fane,
Where sculptur'd MARS may wreath the Coward's Head,
Or Truth's bright Form o'er perjur'd Dust complain.

Midst Life's gay Scenes your calm Retreats he lov'd,
Your wrested Pomp his artless Numbers mourn—
Where led, by Choice, his pensive Footsteps rov'd,
May Friendship place, and you protect his Urn! —

Could aught yet more endear your circling Wood,
It is, ARDELIA! unconstrain'd and free,
That here, reflecting on Life's Sum of Good,
My Breast first heav'd an anxious Sigh for Thee!

You too, YE FAIR, of neighb'ring Scenes the Grace
(Whose envy'd Praise the Bard advent'rous seeks),
Once deign to visit this sequester'd Place,
Instruction's Voice amidst the Ruin speaks!

Whence claim they Praise, these Piles which strewn on Earth
(A steril Burthen) mock their former State?
'Tis from Remembrance of their youthful Worth;—
They once were beautiful, they once were great!

Those Charms alone survive that deck the Heart,
Command Respect which growing Years increase,
Bloom when the Roses from the Cheek depart,
And ebbing Life's tumultuous Raptures cease!

Forgive the Muse, if with presumptuous Love
She wooes your Ears t'attend her moral Lay;
Lest faithless to themselves your Pleasures prove,
And useless Time steal unimprov'd away!

For know, your Bosoms feed a Flame as bright
As cheers a dying CATO'S latest Hour;
A youthful AMMON warms to lead the Fight,
Or lights a JULIUS to the Goal of Pow'r!

Oh! trust not then the Force of radiant Eyes
Those short-liv'd Glories of your sportive Band,—
Pleas'd with its Stars, though laughing Morn arise,
A steadier Beam meridian Skies demand!

Reflect, ere (Victor of each lovely Frame)
TIME bids th' external, fleeting Graces fade,
'Tis Reason's Base supports the noblest Claim,
'Tis Sense preserves the Conquests Beauty made!
